---
layout: post
title:  "Bipolar D&D Character"
date:   2025-04-07 11:37:58 -0600
categories: D&D MentalHealth
---

So someone asked on a stream that i was watching recently for advice about playing a bipolar D&D character, the streamer not having much experience with bipolar disorder only suggested doing research before attempting as it could become offensive if you don't know what you're doing. Having bipolar disorder myself and having grown up with a parent that had it even worse than I do, I figured I could write this to help anyone else interested in doing this. Though I will start with a warning, it's not fun having bipolar and I don't really recommend trying to emulate it just because I don't think it makes for a great character trait. But I figure you're reading this because you think it does so lets get on with it!

One thing is yeah, do research! and more than just reading this post. There are two main types of bipolar disorder and I can only really speak to my experience with type 2. Even among type 2 there are a variety of experiences, and I'm sure im not the only one that is posting about mine online so go find more to get a better picture. The main difference between type 1 and type 2 is the severity and duration of the manic episodes. Another thing to consider are psychotic symptoms like hallucinations. Something else that is important to consider is that bipolar doesn't always appear in a vacuum, I have ADHD and social anxiety which affect how my bipolar disorder effects my life. So you should decide if you're going to give your character any co-morbidities. Since bipolar is an issue with brain chemistry, there are also interactions with other chemicals that affect the brain, like lsd is generally less effective on people with bipolar. So your character may have different interactions with herbs and such.

My history, I wasn't officially diagnosed until early 30's and thats when I started getting actual help from a medical professional. Before that I was managing the symptoms with force of will and craving based self medication. Some things that help are red meat and sugar. The force of will is draining, imagining having to manually control your tongue all the time and breath. It would impact the rest of your life because you have that much less brain power to apply to other things. The thing I probably struggled the most with was the anger issues. Any minor inconvenience would send me into a rage, even though I knew it was an entirely unreasonable reaction to what was going on, so a part of my mind was always occupied with monitoring my reactions to what was going on to ensure they were reasonable and socially acceptable. Other than that I would go through manic periods where I was high energy, either happy or angry but always full of energy for whichever. Those times were when the impulsivity would be particularly bad, I would be prone to impulse purchases and doing things that just weren't good ideas. Like one time I climbed a radio tower after a concert. Basically imagine the manic pixie dream girl meme and the random stuff she would get up to and you'll probably be on the right track.

How I would recommend running a bipolar character. Work with your DM and have them roll at the beginning of a quest to see if you're going to be manic or depressed during this quest. You can play with the numbers, but something like roll a d6 and on a 1 you're angry manic, on a 6 you're happy manic, and otherwise you're depressed. You can use special herbs, or red meat or sugar to help offset the symptoms somewhat. Inconveniences throw you into a rage almost like a barbarian but with less control and without the benefits, so if someone trips you in a tavern, instead of laughing it off you jump straight to violence. When you're depressed you engage less and are less easily excited about things like loot. When you're manic you are more excited about everything, and have trouble sitting still and listening to dialog. Which brings up another point to keep in mind, when your character is manic they will probably be taking the spotlight more and interacting more, so its good to talk to the other players and make sure they are okay with that. It will probably help that your character take more of a backseat when depressed to balance things out. 